# Introduction

There are many factors that contribute to a child's development, from the nurture of their parents and the home learning environment to the area in which they grow up. Many studies have tried to establish which make the strongest contribution to a child's "school-readiness", defined here as reaching a Good Level of Development (GLD) in the [Early Years Foundation Stage Profile](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-years-foundation-stage-profile-handbook) (EYFSP). We know that their Free School Meals (FSM) status, the physical and mental health of their parents, their parents' income and smoking in pregnancy all affect whether they are school ready ([Isaacs, J., 2012](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/0319_school_disadvantage_isaacs.pdf); [Peterson, J. et al., 2018](https://www.publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-split/142/5/e20181126/38543/The-Intersection-of-Health-and-Education-to?autologincheck=redirected); [Brophy, S. et al., 2021](https://www.adruk.org/fileadmin/uploads/adruk/Documents/Data_Insight_Risk_factors_for_not_being_ready_to_start_school__February_2021_.pdf); [Cooper, K., 2021](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0038038520939397)).

Place seems to matter too: At the local level, each Local Authority in England has different funding, different services and a different environment - we would expect all these things to impact on school readiness. Indeed, we see substantial variation in the percentage of children reaching a Good Level of Development (GLD) in each Local Authority (LA). Figure @fig:gld_grouped contains a number of plots which shows how gender can have an effect on the percentage reaching a GLD as well as the Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) decile. The gender gap is slowing closing over time, and the percentage of children reaching a GLD has been increasing since 2012, but this is now slowing. We highlight London boroughs in pink to show that areas such as Hackney, Lewisham and Barking and Dagenham have a noticeably higher GLD percentage than other LAs in England of the same IMD decile.

![GLD Plots for 2018-2019. (Top left) The mean IMD Decile for the LA plotted against the mean GLD percentage. Pink dots are those LAs which are based in London. (Top middle) The distribution of percentage of children reaching a GLD across the LAs. (Top right) The distribution of the percentage of children reaching a GLD across the LAs separated by gender. (Bottom left) The mean GLD percentage for all LAs, separated by gender over time. (Bottom middle) The mean percentage point change in GLD for each year, separated by gender. \label{gld_grouped}](png/gld_descriptive_stats_grouped_plot.png){#fig:gld_grouped}

We can see this more clearly in the choropleths and bar charts in Figures @fig:choro_all and @fig:choro_fsm. 

Figure @fig:choro_all shows the GLD distribution for all children, whilst @fig:choro_fsm shows it for those on Free School Meals (FSM).

* For all children, there is a North/South divide with many of the top 20 LAs with the lowest percentage of children reaching a GLD situated in the north of England, and vice versa for the highest percentage. On the choropleth map, we can clearly see a cluster of LAs in the north west of England around Lancashire, Manchester and Liverpool who have a much lower percentage.
* However, when we look at the percentage of children on FSMs reaching a GLD, the patterns change (Figure @fig:choro_fsm). Some of the more deprived London boroughs have the highest percentage of children on FSMs reaching GLDs, and although there are still areas in the north such as Cumbria, Liverpool and Leeds with low percentages of children on FSM reaching a GLD, wealthier LAs in the south have now appeared. Areas such as Wiltshire, Bedfordshire and West Sussex which have quite high percentages of children reaching a GLD overall, are not bringing the FSM children up to the same level.

![Choropleth maps of school readiness for England and focussing on the London boroughs. (Top right) Bar charts showing the top 20 LADs with the highest percentage of children who are school ready (left, in green) and the lowest percentage of children who are school ready (right, orange). \label{choro_all}](png/choro_highest_and_lowest_school_ready_children.png){#fig:choro_all}

![Choropleth maps of school readiness for those on Free School Meals for England and focussing on the London boroughs. (Top right) Bar charts showing the top 20 LADs with the highest percentage of children who are school ready and are on Free School Meals (left, in green) and the lowest percentage of children who are school ready and are on Free School Meals (right, orange).\label{choro_fsm}](png/choro_highest_and_lowest_school_ready_children_fsm.png){#fig:choro_fsm}

This example underscores the need to take into account local local conditions when trying to understand differences in early year outcomes, and to acknowledge that even when we do so, areas that at first glance, appear to have similar demographics and levels of deprivation, perform very differently. One potential explanation for why similar areas under or over perform compared to each other are differences in hard-to-observe characteristics of these locations, including early years policy and practice. 

This paper reports the findings of such a clustering exercise, and an analysis of its outputs. Instead of focusing on a small number of variables that have known effects on school readiness, we have used 300+ indicators from the [Fingertips Public Health England](https://fingertips.phe.org.uk/) dataset, which we analyse using unsupervised machine learning methods. These vary from information about the local area in terms of diversity, socio-economic status to the percentage of the population that is obese or the percentage of adults that feel lonely. 

By using such a wide variety of features, we hope to identify clusters that are qualitatively different along a variety of dimensions that bear on early year outcomes. We then compare early year performane between and across clusters, helping us to identify local authorities that out or under-perform compared to their peers. We note that our analysis is not aimed at establishing causal drivers of differences in early year performance between clusters, but to find useful ways to describe those differences based on a large of variables about a local authorities' socio-economic context. We are supplementing this analysis with an ambitious qualitative survey of the LAs in England aimed at mapping their policy and practice around Early Years. Our clustering will help to identify different "types" of local authority that we want to capture in the survey, with a particular focus on local authorities which are outperforming their peers, suggesting the presence of specific policies or early year approaches that might be beneficial for school readiness. Provided the pilot is a success, the ambition is to scale this up to survey all 151 LAs in England, providing one of the most thorough mappings of Early Years practice ever conducted in England.

We have opted for a clustering approach instead of regressing early year outcomes on potential explanatory factors for several reasons: First, there is likely to be strong multicollinearity and confoudnesness between variables, making a regression approach less robust or informative. Second, we are interested in non-linear interactions between variables that, in a regression framework, would have to be incorporated through a combinatiorial explotion of interaction terms. Third, and perhaps most importantly, a regression model would be highly informative about what factors (and interactions of factors) are associated to early year outcomes on average, and potentially what local authorities out or underperform versus what the model would have predicted, but it would not tell us much about who those local authorities' peers are, and what are the shared factors and challenges leading them to be in the same group. We also believe that this approach helps to enhance the fairness of our analysis by allowing us to report out-performance versus local authorities in a similar rather than wildly different and perhaps disadvantaged context. The downside - that we are not able to say much about causality, will be addressed in future stages of the research.


<!--
We are not using either of these techniques, predominately as we are not aiming to build a causal model. The Fingertips dataset is a large dataset where there will be many confounders. We are not trying to minimise the effects of confounders, rather we are trying to segment local authorities with similar characteristics. The presence of the survey after the data analysis means we are not restrained in trying to restrict this to causal factors. Furthermore, we have used a clustering pipeline - running several different clustering models with different hyperparameters to link LAs together. The more times an LA is linked to another, the more likely they are to be in the same cluster, thus adding a robustness to this methodology.
-->

Next section we discuss our data and methodology in additional result. Having done this, we present our results. This includes differences between clusters in their secondary characteristics, early year performances and variables that we know are causal drivers of early year performance, an identification of out and underperforming local authorities in different clusters, and an analysis of the evolution of gender parity in outcomes. We present the conclusions and next steps in the final section.

<!--### NOTE: Need to add some conclusions.
-->
