# Conclusions

We have developed a data pipeline to cluster English Counties and Unitary Authorities (C/UA) into groups with similar socio-demographic characteristics and health challenges, and compared their early year performance according to the most recent data and historically, and taking into account differences in performance between boys and girls. We have also considered differences between clusters in variables that we know are causally linked to early year outcomes. Our goal through all of this is to create a new map of early year outcomes in the UK that takes into account the fact that although geography is an important determinant of outcomes, deprivation and societal and health challenges can be found across all of England. Having created this map, we look for examples of out and under-performance in its clusters for additional analysis in follow-on work.

We reveal a number of insights about the situation and evolution of early year performance in different parts of England. 

Our clusters reflect in part geography, with clusters 1 and 3 mostly in the North, cluster 5 in London and cluster 4 in the South, and in part demography, with cluster 4 comprising C/UAs with older populations and clusters 2 and 5 more ethnically diverse populations.  

When we compare clusters in their early year performance we detect important differences between a cluster of affluent C/UAs in the Greater South East (cluster 0) and other parts in the country, notably a cluster comprising cities in the Midlands, North West and Yorkshire (cluster 2). Clusters 6 and 7, with older populations and lower levels of deprivation, also perform better than clusters in the North. These results are consistent with the idea that the localised (economic and social) challenges faced in different parts of the country shape their early years outcomes and the policies that need to be put in place to improve these outcomes. Many of these challenges are not confined to specific parts of the country. This is reflected by the fact that our median cluster contains C/UAs belonging to at least 5 unique regions.

We also find some challenges in early year outcomes in wealthier parts of the country, such as cluster 4, which includes cities in the South such as Bristol, Reading and Southampton, which has experienced a decline in its EFSYP average point score between 2013 and 2019 and stagnated in its ability to equalise early year outcomes between boys and girls.

Our analysis does not seem to be fully explained by differences in causal drivers of early years across C/UAs: while we do find that cluster 0 is in a favourable situation for many of these clusters, and cluster 2 is in a challenging situation, we do not observe substantial differences in early years performance between e.g. clusters 6 and 7 where positive drivers of performance are present, and clusters 1 and 3, where the opposite is true.

We conclude by highlighting what our analysis _has not done_, which is to explain the reason for differences in performance between clusters as well as between outperforming and underperforming C/UAs inside clusters. We will consider some of these questions in follow-on research, with a particular focus on potential differences in policy between C/UAs that might explain differences in outcomes despite similarities in context.

## Limitations and next steps

One important limitation of our analysis is its reliance on the Public Health Framework (PHF) indicator inventory, which as we noted is focused on health challenges and contains strongly overlapping and correlated variables. An obvious next step is to include in the analysis other contextual variables capturing important dimensions of place such as the local economy and its industrial composition, the built environment (for example through the [Access to Healthy Assets and Hazards](https://data.cdrc.ac.uk/dataset/access-healthy-assets-hazards-ahah) dataset) and richer socio-demographic information from the latest census. 

Our analysis has been performed at a high level of geographical resolution at which most secondary and outcome data is available. This ignores substantial levels of heterogeneity inside C/UAs. In the future, we would like to undertake a more finely grained version of the analysis that we performed here using more detailed data, potentially helping us to identify clusters of micro-geographies which are similar along many dimensions yet different in their early year outcomes.

As noted in the methodology, we had to remove from our data a number of C/UAs that were missing information in several indicators. In future work we will explore imputation strategies to include them in our cluster analysis.

We performed our clustering on the most recent slate of PHF indicators. It would be useful to check if our results change when we use earlier data to implement the clustering pipeline, and to analyse which, if any, C/UAs "swap" clusters over time. 

We have observed throughout the report that the variables underpinnning our clustering should not be understood as causal drivers of early year outcomes, but as a summary of a C/UAs context which shapes those outcomes, including through important variables that are not included in our dataset but proxied by it. We are digging further into this issue through qualitative research and a survey with a particular focus on potential policy drivers of differences betweeen underperforming and outperforming variables _inside_ clusters. We believe that there are also opportunities to use our clusters as controls as part of quantitative analyses of the causal determinants of early year outcomes. 

We conclude by noting that our analysis has focused on a small number of measures of early year outcomes, most notably average point scores and percentage with good level of development, and generally on total scores. Going forward, it would be desirable to consider other measures and to pay more attention to inequality across a wider range of dimensions than genre, for example in terms of ethnicity or poverty proxied through Free School Meals. This would help us create a more holistic view of the differences in early year performance between different parts of the country, and to identify locations adopting policies that help children achieve good outcomes despite substantial challenges in their social and economic context.


